# Great expectations setup with [Iowa liquor data](https://data.iowa.gov/Sales-Distribution/Iowa-Liquor-Sales/m3tr-qhgy)


The use of great expectations(abbrevate as ge in the rest of the document), could be split into 4 stpes. These steps will be discussed below in details.

## 1. Setup: package setup and data context initialization
``` python 
pip install great_expectations

great_expectations init
```

* Note: If need to use the offline version of the package, please use the following command 
``` pip install git+https://github.com/StatCan/great_expectations.git@feature/offline-data-docs ```

## 2. Connect to data

### a) Related terms: 
1. Data Context: primary entry point to ge
2. Data Connector: Setup the configuration for data connection to data source 
    * RuntimeDataConnector: accessing **in-memory** dataframe using *RuntimBatchRequest*
    * InferredAssetFilesystemDataConnector: RegEX on filename patterns
    * ConfiguredAssetFilesystemDataConnector: Fine tuned on the 
3. Data Source: API access/config to the data assets 
4. Data Asset: The actual data object
------- 
5. Batch: Records within Data Asset
6. Batch Request: Specifying what data asset to use in the config

### b) Stpes to steup 
```python
great_expectations datasource new

1. file systems 
1. Pandas 
./data (data directory)
```
Follow the instructions and run all cells within the notebook. 

### c) Note on various data connector: 
In the great_expectations.ymal file, the default datasource config will look like the following: 
```
datasource_yaml = f"""
name: getting_started_datasource
class_name: Datasource
execution_engine:
  class_name: PandasExecutionEngine
data_connectors:
    default_inferred_data_connector_name:
        class_name: InferredAssetFilesystemDataConnector
        base_directory: ../data/
        default_regex:
          group_names:
            - data_asset_name
          pattern: (.*)
    default_runtime_data_connector_name:
        class_name: RuntimeDataConnector
        assets:
            my_runtime_asset_name:
              batch_identifiers:
                - runtime_batch_identifier_name
"""
```

**Two data connectors** are specified in the config file, however we are actually only using the default_runtime_data_connector_name.<br>

[runtime batch request setup github notebook, see line 62-71](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations/blob/develop/tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_create_a_batch_of_data_from_an_in_memory_pandas_dataframe.py)


## 3. Create Expectations 
### a) CLI commands
```
great_expectations suite new

> Choose from three methods in section 3c. 
> Make a name of your expectation suite. 

Then follow the steps in the notebook. 
```
*Note* : Using the CLI for initial suite setup only, later minor update could be made directly to the ./expectations/__suite_name__.json file
### b) Quickly explor expecttions in a notebook
[How to quickly explore Expectations in a notebook](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/guides/miscellaneous/how_to_quickly_explore_expectations_in_a_notebook#5-save-your-expectation-suite)
See suite_from_notebook.ipynb 

### c) Three ways to create a suite
1. From domin knowwledge 
2. Using sample batch of data to create a validator (interactive mode)
   * Add expectations by calling specific expectation methods on the validator object. They all begin with .expect_
   * After exploring, save the validator to a checkpoint
3. Automatically with a profiler
    * Profiler creates a starting point for quickly generating Expectations

## 4. Validate data

### a) Related terms: 
1. Data Docs: Final html expectaions report 
2. Checkpoint: Saved object for late comparisions. The YAML is saved under ./great_expectations/checkpoints/XXX.ymal
    * You can include multiple -batch_request in the validatios section. This setup could include multiple expectation_suits, or multiple data assets. 
    * Make sure the **data asset name** matches its **data connector type**
    * [In-memory df batch request reference github notebook](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations/blob/develop/tests/integration/docusaurus/validation/checkpoints/how_to_pass_an_in_memory_dataframe_to_a_checkpoint.py)
### b) CLI commands:
```
# To make a new checkpoint
great_expectations checkpoint new getting_started_checkpoint(checkpoint name as you wish)

# To run existing checkpoint
great_expectations checkpoint run my_checkpoint(The checkpoint name you made)
```

### c) Notes: 
  * When running the [notebook that automatically generated by GE at cell 2](https://github.com/yussaaa/great_expectatisons_runtime_demo/blob/main/great_expectations/uncommitted/edit_checkpoint_demo_checkpoint.ipynb) for the checkpoint YMAL file config, be sure to change the datascore & data connector to the in-memory one as we mentioned in [the end of point 2](https://github.com/yussaaa/great_expectatisons_runtime_demo#c-note-on-various-data-connector)

  * The data docs report is saved under ```great_expectations/uncommitted/data_docs```. This merely serves as an example as these reports are not meant to be version controled.

## 5. /great_expectations folder structure

After running the init command, your great_expectations directory will contain all of the important components of a local Great Expectations deployment. This is what the directory structure looks like

* great_expectations.yml contains the main configuration of your deployment.
The expectations directory stores all your Expectations as JSON files. If you want to store them somewhere else, you can change that later.

* The plugins/ directory holds code for any custom plugins you develop as part of your deployment.
* The uncommitted/ directory contains files that shouldn’t live in version control. It has a .gitignore configured to exclude all its contents from version control. 
  The main contents of the directory are:
  - uncommitted/config_variables.yml, which holds sensitive information, such as database credentials and other secrets.
  - uncommitted/data_docs, which contains Data Docs generated from Expectations, Validation Results, and other metadata.
  - uncommitted/validations, which holds Validation Results generated by Great Expectations.

https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_setup

## 6. References: 
* [Offical document](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview)
* 4b running checkpoint [How to validate data by running a checkpoint](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/guides/validation/how_to_validate_data_by_running_a_checkpoint)

